OBSDOCS-764: Distributed tracing 3.1 release notes and content rearrangement (from multiple pages into a single page) (#70943)
openshift/openshift-docs: distr_tracing/distr_tracing_rn/distr-tracing-rn-3-1.adoc

:_mod-docs-content-type: ASSEMBLY
include::_attributes/common-attributes.adoc[]
[id="distributed-tracing-rn-3-1"]
= Release notes for {DTProductName} 3.1
:context: distributed-tracing-rn-3-1

toc::[]

> include::modules/distr-tracing-product-overview.adoc[leveloffset=+1]

Reviewer: IMO, it would make more sense to make this module a simple snippet, with no title etc, so that there aren't 2 headings together with no text between when it is included in these assemblies. Wdyt?

Author: Thank you for the suggestion. I am adding it to the list of improvements for the next release because there is currently no page that presents an overview and introduction into this product, so I plan to create such a page for the next release. Once I have that figured out, I'll revisit this section.

> [id="distributed-tracing-rn_3-1_component-versions"]

Reviewer: I don't usually see underscores used in IDs unless it's a specific case (additional resources, prerequisites) so per the guidelines here I'd recommend only using dashes for these https://github.com/openshift/openshift-docs/blob/main/contributing_to_docs/doc_guidelines.adoc#anchoring-in-assembly-files

e.g. `[id="distributed-tracing-rn-3-1-component-versions"]`

Author: Thank you. I'll add these fixes to the next release's epic.

== Component versions in the {DTProductName} 3.1

[options="header"]
|===
|Operator |Component |Version

|{TempoName}
|Tempo
|2.3.1

//for each new release, update the release number in the xref path on the following line
|xref:../../otel/otel_rn/otel-rn-3.1.adoc[{OTELName}]
|OpenTelemetry
|0.93.0

|{JaegerName} (deprecated)
|Jaeger
|1.53.0

> |===

Reviewer: It seems odd that there's a link for one here and not the others - maybe just leave the link out?

Author: This was specifically requested by the product manager because previously OpenTelemetry was part of the Distributed Tracing docs but was then moved out of the Distributed Tracing docs to become a separate item in the top-level navigation menu of the OCP docs. AFAIK, this link is to promote OpenTelemetry, but I expect to remove this link from the Distributed Tracing docs for a future release, perhaps even for the next 3.1 release if we get sufficient content in it to have the OpenTelemetry docs separate from the Distributed Tracing docs.

// Tempo section
[id="distributed-tracing-rn_3-1_tempo-release-notes"]
== {TempoName}

[id="distributed-tracing-rn_3-1_tempo-release-notes_new-features-and-enhancements"]
=== New features and enhancements

This update introduces the following enhancements for the {TempoShortName}:

> * Monolithic custom resource in dev-preview support.

Author: Thank you for catching this. I already have an agreement with the engineering stakeholders to not use Developer Preview and instead use Technology Preview for those features.

* Support for cluster-wide proxy environments.
* Support for TraceQL to Gateway component.

[id="distributed-tracing-rn_3-1_tempo-release-notes_bug-fixes"]
=== Bug fixes

This update introduces the following bug fixes for the {TempoShortName}:

> * Before this update, when a TempoStack was created with the `monitorTab` enabled in {product-title} 4.15, the required `tempo-redmetrics-cluster-monitoring-view` ClusterRoleBinding was not created. This update resolves the issue by fixing the operator RBAC for the monitor tab when the operator is deployed in an arbitrary namespace. (link:https://issues.redhat.com/browse/TRACING-3786[TRACING-3786])

Reviewer: Is a TempoStack a custom resource? If so, it should be formatted as "`TempoStack` object|resource|custom resource" per https://github.com/openshift/openshift-docs/blob/main/contributing_to_docs/doc_guidelines.adoc#object-references

Reviewer: Same for "`ClusterRoleBinding` object", or else use "cluster role binding" for the general reference

Author: Thank you. I'll clarify that this is a TempoStack instance (created by the Tempo Operator).

Author: Interesting, I see "ClusterRoleBinding" in the OpenShift docs: https://docs.openshift.com/container-platform/4.9/rest_api/role_apis/clusterrolebinding-authorization-openshift-io-v1.html

Reviewer: API documentation is a different case 🙂 it's generated from the code directly. It's sort of the exception to the rule.

> * Before this update, when a TempoStack was created with the `monitorTab` enabled in {product-title} 4.15, the required `tempo-redmetrics-cluster-monitoring-view` ClusterRoleBinding was not created. This update resolves the issue by fixing the operator RBAC for the monitor tab when the operator is deployed in an arbitrary namespace. (link:https://issues.redhat.com/browse/TRACING-3786[TRACING-3786])

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Before this update, when a `TempoStack` object was created with the `monitorTab` field enabled in {product-title} 4.15, the required `tempo-redmetrics-cluster-monitoring-view` cluster role binding was not created. This update resolves the issue by fixing the Operator RBAC for the monitor tab when the Operator is deployed in an arbitrary namespace. (link:https://issues.redhat.com/browse/TRACING-3786[TRACING-3786])
```
Operator must always be capitalized: https://redhat-documentation.github.io/supplementary-style-guide/#operator

Author: Thank you. I'm pretty sure I was advised to use lowercase during one of previous PR reviews for the OpenShift docs.

> * Before this update, when a TempoStack was created on an {product-title} cluster with only an IPV6 networking stack, the compactor and ingestor pods ran in the `CrashLoopBackOff` state, resulting in multiple errors. This update provides support for IPv6 clusters.(link:https://issues.redhat.com/browse/TRACING-3226[TRACING-3226])

Reviewer: Same comment for `TempoStack` formatting

Author: I'm checking all instances of TempoStack here. Thank you.

[id="distributed-tracing-rn_3-1_tempo-release-notes_known-issues"]
=== Known issues

//There is currently a known issue:
There are currently known issues:

* Currently, when used with the {TempoOperator}, the Jaeger UI only displays services that have sent traces in the last 15 minutes. For services that did not send traces in the last 15 minutes, traces are still stored but not displayed in the Jaeger UI. (link:https://issues.redhat.com/browse/TRACING-3139[TRACING-3139])
* Currently, the {TempoShortName} fails on the IBM Z (`s390x`) architecture. (link:https://issues.redhat.com/browse/TRACING-3545[TRACING-3545])

// Jaeger section
[id="distributed-tracing-rn_3-1_jaeger-release-notes"]
== {JaegerName}

[id="distributed-tracing-rn_3-1_jaeger-release-notes_support-for-elasticsearch-operator"]

> === Support for Elasticsearch Operator

Reviewer: There is an attribute for the Elasticsearch `{es-op}` and Loki `{loki-op}` Operators now, please use them to maintain consistency

{JaegerName} 3.1 is supported for use with the OpenShift Elasticsearch Operator 5.6, 5.7, and 5.8.

[id="distributed-tracing-rn_3-1_jaeger-release-notes_deprecated-functionality"]
=== Deprecated functionality

In the {DTProductName} 3.1, Jaeger and Elasticsearch are deprecated, and both are planned to be removed in a future release. Red Hat will provide critical and above CVE bug fixes and support for these components during the current release lifecycle, but these components will no longer receive feature enhancements.

> 

Author: Thank you, I've just followed your guidance and fixed the deprecation admonitions in the docs.
However, here, because it's the release notes page, and because it has some specific information, I've followed the SSG guidance on deprecation notices in release notes: https://redhat-documentation.github.io/supplementary-style-guide/#release-notes-doc-texts.

In the {DTProductName} 3.1, Tempo provided by the {TempoOperator} and the OpenTelemetry Collector provided by the {OTELName} are the preferred Operators for distributed tracing collection and storage. The OpenTelemetry and Tempo distributed tracing stack is to be adopted by all users because this will be the stack that will be enhanced going forward.

////
[id="distributed-tracing-rn_3-1_jaeger-release-notes_new-features-and-enhancements"]
=== New features and enhancements
This update introduces the following enhancements for the {JaegerShortName}:
* Support for ...
////

[id="distributed-tracing-rn_3-1_jaeger-release-notes_bug-fixes"]
=== Bug fixes

> This update introduces the following bug fix for the {JaegerShortName}:

Reviewer: Future food for thought - I'd consider removing this line since it's sort of just adding fluff. The heading already explains that these are bug fixes, so it just doesn't seem necessary to have this introduction line as well, especially when there's only one bug fix.

Author: Thank you for the suggestion, Ashleigh. I'm adding to the list of improvement for subsequent releases.

> * Before this update, the connection target URL for the `jaeger-agent` container in the `jager-query` pod was overwritten with another namespace URL in {product-title} 4.13. This was caused by a bug in the sidecar injection code in the `jaeger-operator`, causing nondeterministic `jaeger-agent` injection. With this update, the operator prioritizes the Jaeger instance from the same namespace as the target deployment. (link:https://issues.redhat.com/browse/TRACING-3722[TRACING-3722])

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Before this update, the connection target URL for the `jaeger-agent` container in the `jager-query` pod was overwritten with another namespace URL in {product-title} 4.13. This was caused by a bug in the sidecar injection code in the `jaeger-operator`, causing nondeterministic `jaeger-agent` injection. With this update, the Operator prioritizes the Jaeger instance from the same namespace as the target deployment. (link:https://issues.redhat.com/browse/TRACING-3722[TRACING-3722])
```

Author: Thank you. Done when fixing it in response to your previous comment.

[id="distributed-tracing-rn_3-1_jaeger-release-notes_known-issues"]
=== Known issues

//There is currently a known issue:
There are currently known issues:

* Currently, Apache Spark is not supported.

ifndef::openshift-rosa[]

> * Currently, the streaming deployment via AMQ/Kafka is not supported on the IBM Z and IBM Power Systems architectures.

Author: Thank you for the idea. There are indeed, and I've just added them to the files: `{ibm-z-title}` and `{ibm-power-title}`.

:_mod-docs-content-type: ASSEMBLY
include::_attributes/common-attributes.adoc[]
[id="distributed-tracing-rn-3-1"]
= Release notes for {DTProductName} 3.1
:context: distributed-tracing-rn-3-1

toc::[]

include::modules/distr-tracing-product-overview.adoc[leveloffset=+1]

[id="distributed-tracing-rn_3-1_component-versions"]
== Component versions in the {DTProductName} 3.1

[options="header"]
|===
|Operator |Component |Version

|{JaegerName}
|Jaeger
|1.53.0

//for each new release, update the release number in the xref path on the following line
|xref:../../otel/otel_rn/otel-rn-3.1.adoc[{OTELName}]
|OpenTelemetry
|0.93.0

|{TempoName}
|Tempo
|2.3.1

|===

// Jaeger section

> [id="distributed-tracing-rn_3-1_jaeger-release-notes"]

Reviewer 2: Can we movo tempo RN to the top of the page?

Author: Great idea! Sure, let me swap them!

[id="distributed-tracing-rn-3-1"]
= Release notes for {DTProductName} 3.1
:context: distributed-tracing-rn-3-1

toc::[]

include::modules/distr-tracing-product-overview.adoc[leveloffset=+1]

[id="distributed-tracing-rn_3-1_component-versions"]
== Component versions in the {DTProductName} 3.1

[options="header"]
|===
|Operator |Component |Version

|{TempoName}
|Tempo
|2.3.1

//for each new release, update the release number in the xref path on the following line
|xref:../../otel/otel_rn/otel-rn-3.1.adoc[{OTELName}]
|OpenTelemetry
|0.93.0

|{JaegerName} (deprecated)
|Jaeger
|1.53.0

|===

// Tempo section
[id="distributed-tracing-rn_3-1_tempo-release-notes"]
== {TempoName}

[id="distributed-tracing-rn_3-1_tempo-release-notes_new-features-and-enhancements"]
=== New features and enhancements

This update introduces the following enhancements for the {TempoShortName}:

* Monolithic custom resource in dev-preview support.
* Support for cluster-wide proxy environments.
* Support for TraceQL to Gateway component.

[id="distributed-tracing-rn_3-1_tempo-release-notes_bug-fixes"]
=== Bug fixes

This update introduces the following bug fixes for the {TempoShortName}:

> * Fixed operator RBAC for the monitor tab when the operator is deployed in arbitrary namespace. (link:https://issues.redhat.com/browse/TRACING-3786[TRACING-3786])

Reviewer 3: Rephrase to follow guidance here: https://redhat-documentation.github.io/supplementary-style-guide/#_bug_fix

For example, maybe something like:

"Before this update, the RBAC configuration for the operator RBAC caused it to deploy in an arbitrary namespace, so RBAC was not explicitly provided to the operator. Now, the operator RBAC for the monitor tab is deployed dynamically based on the namespace of the operator."

I don't know how accurate that is; trying to piece together information from the linked Jira bug, but I don't have the Tempo domain knowledge that you do, so it's just an example.

Author: @gwynnemonahan, WDYT?
 
* Before this update, when a TempoStack was created with the `monitorTab` enabled in {product-title} 4.15, the required `tempo-redmetrics-cluster-monitoring-view` ClusterRoleBinding was not created. This update resolves the issue by fixing the operator RBAC for the monitor tab when the operator is deployed in an arbitrary namespace. (link:https://issues.redhat.com/browse/TRACING-3786[TRACING-3786])

* Before this update, the `jaeger-agent` container connection target URL in the `jager-query` pod was overwritten with another namespace URL in {product-title} 4.13. This was caused by a bug in the sidecar injection code in the `jaeger-operator`, causing nondeterministic `jaeger-agent` injection. With this update, the operator prioritizes the Jaeger instance from the same namespace as the target deployment. (link:https://issues.redhat.com/browse/TRACING-3722[TRACING-3722])

* Before this update, the Jaeger Operator used other images than `relatedImages`. This caused the *ImagePullBackOff* error in disconnected network environments when launching the `jaeger` pod because the `oc adm catalog mirror` command mirrors images specified in `relatedImages`. This update provides support for disconnected environments when using the `oc adm catalog mirror` CLI command. (link:https://issues.redhat.com/browse/TRACING-3546[TRACING-3546])

Author: @gwynnemonahan, done.

> * Fixed support for IPv6 clusters.(link:https://issues.redhat.com/browse/TRACING-3226[TRACING-3226])

Author: @gwynnemonahan, WDYT?

* Before this update, when a TempoStack was created on an {product-title} cluster with only an IPV6 networking stack, the compactor and ingestor pods ran in `CrashLoopBackOff`, resulting in multiple errors. This update provides support for IPv6 clusters.(link:https://issues.redhat.com/browse/TRACING-3226[TRACING-3226])

> * Fixed support for IPv6 clusters.(link:https://issues.redhat.com/browse/TRACING-3226[TRACING-3226])

Author: @gwynnemonahan, FYI, I also fixed https://github.com/openshift/openshift-docs/pull/70943/files#diff-d37ae894d6dfb01fa43c575233ec27dcecc0f740eb47043f6b3730516098638cR85-R87.

* Currently, the {TempoShortName} fails on the IBM Z (`s390x`) architecture. (link:https://issues.redhat.com/browse/TRACING-3545[TRACING-3545])

// Jaeger section
[id="distributed-tracing-rn_3-1_jaeger-release-notes"]
== {JaegerName}

[id="distributed-tracing-rn_3-1_jaeger-release-notes_support-for-elasticsearch-operator"]
=== Support for Elasticsearch Operator

{JaegerName} 3.1 is supported for use with the OpenShift Elasticsearch Operator 5.6, 5.7, and 5.8.

[id="distributed-tracing-rn_3-1_jaeger-release-notes_deprecated-functionality"]
=== Deprecated functionality

In Red Hat OpenShift distributed tracing 3.1, Jaeger and Elasticsearch are deprecated, and both are planned to be removed in a future release. Red Hat will provide critical and above CVE bug fixes and support for these components during the current release lifecycle, but these components will no longer receive feature enhancements.

> In Red Hat OpenShift distributed tracing 3.1, Tempo provided by the {TempoOperator} and the OpenTelemetry collector provided by the Red Hat build of OpenTelemetry are the preferred Operators for distributed tracing collection and storage. The OpenTelemetry and Tempo distributed tracing stack is to be adopted by all users because this will be the stack that will be enhanced going forward.

Reviewer 3: Use the attribute {OTELName} for "Red Hat build of OpenTelemetry."

See: https://redhat-documentation.github.io/supplementary-style-guide/#_product_names_and_version_references

Author: Thank you so much. Grepped for and fixed.
